Add WAKU2-RLN-CONTRACT spec for mainnet deployment (#30)
waku-org/specs: standards/core/rln-contract.md

- its sender has an active RLN membership; and
- the sender hasn't exceeded their rate limit within the current epoch.

RLN is managed by a smart contract that keeps track of active memberships.
Users interact with the contract to register a new membership and
to obtain Merkle proofs and the tree root,
which is necessary for proof generation and verification.

In testnet deployment, the RLN contract does not require any payment apart from gas costs.
This document aims to make the RLN contract suitable for mainnet deployment.
In particular, the contract would require users to put down a deposit.
The aim of the deposit initially is purely to protect the system from denial-of-service attacks using bandwidth capping.
It may also be explored as a revenue stream for Waku in later versions.

## Semantics

This section is not intended to describe the full contract functionality.
We only focus on functions required for managing memberships, expiration, deposits, etc.
The document might later evolve into a full-fledged contract specification.

The RLN contract provides the following functionalities:
- register a membership in a given tier;
- extend a membership;

> - withdraw the deposit for an expired membership.

Author: I'm not sure I agree with

> No one knows when a certain membership will expire

As of now, a membership has an active lifetime of 90 days, followed by a 30-day grace period, during which it can be either extended or "unregistered" (i.e., deposit withdrawn). The smart contract knows whether 90 days have passed since a given membership was registered. I hope this all becomes clear after I add a state transition diagram (WIP).

> we should notify that his/her account has expired

Although the contract itself can't notify anyone, I agree that this would be a useful service from a service provider (I'm thinking about RLNaaS model here).

> but he/she should be able to withdraw his/her funds

This is indeed the case. Note: I didn't mean "for any expired membership", rather "for (that user's) expired memberships".

I'm also not sure what the difference is between "unregistering" and "withdrawing the deposit". In your view, what should happen during "unregistering"?

> - withdraw the deposit for an expired membership.

Reviewer: > I'm not sure I agree with
> 
> > No one knows when a certain membership will expire
> 

Okay. By that, I mean that the users usually are not aware of any expiry date. For instance, I don't have a clue when a credit card expires until I get an email from any provider informing me about that.
With that comment, I wanted to bring up the need to inform the user's app about the expiry so that the user's app can inform about it when the expiration either happened or is about to happen.

> I'm also not sure what the difference is between "unregistering" and "withdrawing the deposit". In your view, what should happen during "unregistering"?

I might have misunderstood something. IMHO, the RLN account owner should be the only one allowed to withdraw/unregister the account, in the scenario of account expiration.

> - withdraw the deposit for an expired membership.

Author: > the need to inform the user's app about the expiry

I agree with the premise, but do you think this is something a contract should do? The contract itself can't send notifications AFAIU, so some service must track the blockchain events and relay notifications to the user. I agree that this will be useful, it just seems out of scope for a contract spec.

> the RLN account owner should be the only one allowed to withdraw/unregister the account

I agree. However, additionally, the account can "unregister" automatically after its expiration date, if not extended. In that case, its slot in the tree can be overtaken, but the original user's deposit is safe anyway (IMO there should be an extra logic to track unclaimed deposits of overriden expired memberships, letting their users finally withdraw them.) Does this design make sense?

> - withdraw the deposit for an expired membership.

Reviewer 2: > the need to inform the user's app about the expiry

This is not something the contract can do for that matter.

This is a client implementation detail to decide how to communicate to the user what is the RLN membership expire. Depending on the client (mobile app vs cloud node) then it may be done in a different manner.

> - withdraw the deposit for an expired membership.

Author: I added a recommendation in the Implementation Suggestion section to save the expiry date locally and remind the user when their membership is about to expire.

For the _Contract Owner_, the contract provides the following additional functionality:
- change the modifiable parameters (see parameter table below);
- (TBD) freeze certain functionality (e.g., in case of an attack, stop new registrations, deposit withdrawals, etc).

In the initial deployment:
- there is no slashing - that is, a user's deposit is not taken away in case of misbehavior;

> - membership expiration includes a grace period;

Author: > inform the user about the expiration date, one month before it happens

To me this looks a lot like the question of definitions. We can think about expiry in terms of "soft deadline - grace period - hard deadline" or in terms of "notification - hard deadline", where notification time can be thought of as a soft deadline. In my mind these are roughly the same.

The reason why I've separated _active_ and _grace-period_ into two states is that membership extention and deposit withdrawal are only allowed during grace period. The rationale being:
- allowing withdrawal at any time opens up the unintended use pattern where people deposit and withdraw funds quickly;
- allowing extensions at any time allow users to bypass future contract parameter updates (i.e. price increase).

> - membership expiration includes a grace period;

Reviewer 2: Considering the mechanics we are looking into, eg only allowing renewal during grace period, then there is no choice but having a grace period.

- a user can extend their membership without putting up any additional deposit.

### Membership life-cycle

To register a membership, a user locks up a deposit.
Each membership has an expiration date.
After a membership expires, it enters a grace period, during which the user can extend it.
Extending a membership requires no additional deposit.

> After the grace period, an expired membership can be taken over by another user.

Author: This point indeed needs a better wording. "Taken over" here doesn't mean that the original user loses their deposit. The point is (and IMO this is more of an implementation detail) that the non-zero elements in the RLN tree can (and should) be reused to limit tree growth. Therefore, if possible, new membership should reuse tree "slots" of expired memberships instead of creating new ones. What happens with the deposit of the expired membership, if it hasn't been withdrawn already, is a separate question. I would suggest saving this information into some data structure in the smart contract, so that the original user can withdraw their deposit even after the tree slot of their expired membership has been overwritten.

> After the grace period, an expired membership can be taken over by another user.

Reviewer 2: > I think this is unfair. It shouldn't be penalized for being unaware of the expiration date.

The whole premise of an expiration date is that it expires. I am not sure to understand what is unfair here.

| Epoch length                                              | `epoch`    | `10`    | minutes                                                                              | Yes         |                                |
| Maximum total rate limit of concurrent active memberships | `R_{max}`  | TBD     | messages per `epoch`                                                                 | Yes         | Can be replaced with `N_{max}` |
| Maximum number of concurrent active memberships           | `N_{max}`  | `10000` | units                                                                                | Yes         | Can be replaced with `R_{max}` |
| Rate limit for low-tier                                   | `R_{low}`  | `20`    | messages per `epoch`                                                                 | TBD         |                                |
| Rate limit for mid-tier                                   | `R_{mid}`  | `200`   | messages per `epoch`                                                                 | TBD         |                                |

> | Rate limit for high-tier                                  | `R_{high}` | `600`   | messages per `epoch`                                                                 | TBD         |                                |

Author: What do you mean by progressive? I see two ways to interpret this:
1. any continuous function that calculates membership price depending on a user-defined rate limit;
2. same as above _and_ the function not simply multiplication by a constant (i.e., bulk discounts for memberships with higher limits, etc).

In other words, would a linear function satisfy your definition of progressive?

> | Rate limit for high-tier                                  | `R_{high}` | `600`   | messages per `epoch`                                                                 | TBD         |                                |

Reviewer: > What do you mean by progressive?

Yes, I mean giving the user the option to set up an arbitrary limit. It could be linear and top-bounded. The more the user pays the higher rate limit is allowed.

---
title: WAKU2-RLN-CONTRACT
name: Waku2 RLN Contract Specification
category: Standards Track
tags: [waku/core-protocol]
editor: Sergei Tikhomirov <sergei@status.im>
contributors:
---

## Abstract

This specification describes the smart contract that governs RLN memberships, in particular:

- the overall smart contract functionality;
- contract parameters;
- the values of those parameters for the initial deployment;
- the way in which the parameters can be modified.

## Background

> Rate-Limiting Nullifiers (RLN) is a ZK-based rate-limiting technique used in Waku.

Author: I somehow didn't even know this webiste existed, thanks for the link!

RLN is managed by a smart contract that keeps track of active memberships.
Users interact with the contract to register a new membership and
to obtain Merkle proofs and the tree root,
which is necessary for proof generation and verification.

In testnet deployment, the RLN contract does not require any payment apart from gas costs.
This document aims to make the RLN contract suitable for mainnet deployment.
In particular, the contract would require uses to put down a deposit.
The aim of the deposit initially is purely to protect the system from abuse.
It may also be explored as a revenue stream for Waku in later versions.

## Semantics

The RLN contract provides the following functionality:
- register a membership in a given tier;
- check if a membership is valid;
- withdraw the deposit for an expired membership;
- extend an expired membership.

For the `Owner`, the contract provides the following additional functionality:
- change the modifiable parameters (see parameter table below);
- (TBD) freeze certain functionality (e.g., in case of an attack, stop new registrations, deposit withdrawals, etc).

In the initial deployment:

> - there is no slashing;

Reviewer 3: Will the term slashing (and how it could be triggered in context of RLN) be obvious to readers?

- membership expiration includes a grace period;
- a user can extend their membership without putting up any additional deposit.

### Membership life-cycle

To register a membership, a user puts locks up a deposit.
Each membership has an expiration date.

> After a membership expires, it enters a grace period, during which the user can extend it.

Reviewer 3: What does a user need to extend the membership? The secret or to control the wallet which executed the inital registration? Might be worth mentioning it somewhere

Author: Good question.

IIUC, there are three types of identifiers: RLN ID, Waku node ID, and Ethereum address from which transactions are sent to the smart contract. As established elsewhere, Waku node ID and Ethereum address are largely irrelevant in the context of this document.

I see two options regarding the RLN ID:
- only allow extending your own membership, as proven by a signature from a private key from which your RLN commitment ID is derived;
- allow anyone to extend anyone's membership.

Pros and cons of "you can only extend your own membership":
- pro: confirms to the principle of least privileges (see a possible attack described below);
- con: risks linking RLN commitment ID with the Ethereum address from which the extension transaction is sent;
- con: complicated managing many users' RLN memberships by a single service provider (I'm not sure of the exact security model here).

Pros and cons of "anyone can extend any membership":
- pro: conceptually simple, no extra check (and related gas expenses) required;
- pro: simplifies centralized membership management on behalf of many users;
- con: allows an attack where Alice wants to withdraw her deposit towards the end of the grace period, but Bob extends her membership earlier without her consent, so that Alice's deposit remains locked up for another 90 days.

@fryorcraken @jm-clius @alrevuelta @richard-ramos thoughts?

Reviewer 4: Intuitively, if we are going to allow the redeem-my-payment scheme, we should go for a "you can only extend your own membership" for now. Allowing others to extend any membership sounds like a possible future enhancement (if it proves necessary for some use case).

Author: OK, let's only allow the owner of the membership to extend it.

Although this seems to link the memberhip to an Ethereum address from which the extension transaction is sent, I've realized that it's actually within our security model: IIUC, the privacy guarantee is that _messages_ are not linked to a particular membership, not that a membership is not linked to an Ethereum address.

> After a membership expires, it enters a grace period, during which the user can extend it.

Author: The latest understanding is that extension is only possible in the grace period, adding this to the updated text.

Extending a membership requires no additional deposit.
After the grace period, an expired membership can be taken over by another user.
At any point, a user can withdraw their deposit and terminate the membership.

In more detail, the membership life-cycle is as follows:
1. A user registers a membership:
    1. If there are expired unclaimed slots in the tree, use the slot with the earliest expiration date past its grace period, otherwise create a new slot;

>     2. if the membership re-uses a previously used slot, refund the previous user’s deposit.

Reviewer 3: I agree, let's not put the burden of paying gas on the user who is obtaining the new membership

2. The user sends messages while the membership is active:

>     1. If the user exceeds the rate limit, their over-limit messages are not propagated in that epoch; the deposit is not slashed.

Reviewer 3: > are not propagated in that epoch

This made me think about whether they would be propagated in the next epoch somehow... So maybe change the wording to mention that the messages get dropped/ignored by the nodes?

Author: > whether they would be propagated in the next epoch somehow.

Isn't every message committed to one epoch? My understanding was that a message sent in the wrong epoch would be dropped because of that reason, regardless of proof validity - is this true?

Author: > Isn't every message committed to one epoch?

AFAIU now, this is the case. Removed "within this epoch": the message won't be propagated within next epochs either simply because it's commited to a wrong epoch by then.

3. After the membership expires, the user can do one of the following:
    1. Do nothing. The deposit remains in the contract, and the user retains the ability to send messages (respecting the per-epoch rate limit);
    2. Withdraw the deposit. The user receives the full deposit back, and loses the ability to send messages;
    3. Extend the membership. The user sends a transaction to re-enable their membership for another expiration term. The user only covers gas costs and does not have to provide additional funds. The original deposit remains in the contract. The membership is prolonged for another expiration term under the same conditions.

> The user can extend the membership both during and after its grace period.

Reviewer 2: > From what I understand, the renewal is only allowed after expiry and during/after the _grace_ period or am I missing something?

We need the state diagram :)

> The user can extend the membership both during and after its grace period.

Author: State diagram WIP with renewal and withdrawal only allowed _during_ grace period.

By not extending the membership within its grace period, the user assumes the risk of the membership being taken over at any moment.

> A user can hold multiple memberships.

Author: I've realized that I don't understand the relationship between a node (i.e., a node ID?) and a (blockchain) address as identifiers. What is the primary identifier here? From the blockchain standpoint, I would assume, blockchain address is what matters... Where does the node ID come into pucture?

> A user can hold multiple memberships.

Author: There are acutally two questions inside "Can a user hold multiple memberships?".

First: can the same Waku node (i.e., the same P2P node ID) hold multiple RLN memberships? The answer is: technically it could, but it's not currently supported by any Waku implementation. I don't think there's any disagreement here.

Second: if one sends two transactions that call the "register a new membership" function of the RLN contract from the same Ethereum address, should both transactions succeed? Should the contract check whether this Ethereum address has already been issued a membership?

I would suggest that the contract doesn't care which Ethereum addresses the transactions are coming from as long as they pay sufficient fees. Plase let me know if there are reasons why this is a bad idea.

> A user can hold multiple memberships.

Reviewer 2: I agree with your interpretation @s-tikhomirov:

- A Waku node can only hold when RLN membership, this is an implementation limitation. This limitation might be lifted by the Waku team in the future, or anyone developer that decides to implement it themselves.

- A given Ethereum address can register several membership with the RLN smart contract: I suggest to keep this possible. I don't see a reason why we would stop it, on the contrary, it makes it easier for fleet operators to manage their nodes.

> A user can hold multiple memberships.

Reviewer 2: > A given Ethereum address can register several membership with the RLN smart contract: I suggest to keep this possible.

> I think the above point would make the implementation more difficult

?

We are talking about enabling Ethereum account XYZ to register as many RLN membership as they want by sending fees + commitment to the contract.
This is already implemented.
This is the easy version.

The difficult version is updating the smart contract to keep track of the caller and limiting an insert to one membership per Ethereum address.

 > I might be missing something but in which sense the fleet management would be easier :)?

Because as a fleet owner, you can have one Ethereum wallet and use the same wallet to buy the memberships of all your nodes.
If we were to limit to one RLN account per Ethereum wallet, then as a fleet owner, you'd nee to generate and fund one ethereum wallet per RLN membership, which is cumbersome (and pointless).

Memberships are not transferable.
There is no limitation on the number of membership per user (apart from the global limits, see parameter table).

## Contract governance and mutability

The contract governance is follows:

1. the first deployment of the contract allows the `Owner` to modify certain parameters (TBD) under certain constraints (TBD);

> 2. at some point, the `Onwer` would renounce their privileges, and the contract will become immutable;

Author: Is it perhaps worth clarifying that the strict requirement for immutability (MUST) only applies to a hypothetical future version of this spec after the _Owner_ reounces their privileges? Do we want to stress that _if_ the _Owner_ does so, this renouncement MUST deprive the _Owner_ of the upgrading rights in particular?

> 3. further upgrades, if necessary, can be done by deploying a new contract and moving the membership set.

Reviewer 3: IIRC the word used in context of new versions of smart contracts is _migrate_, so we'd be _migrating_ the membership set

> 3. further upgrades, if necessary, can be done by deploying a new contract and moving the membership set.

Author: Changing to "migrating".

## Parameters

We make the following design choices:
- there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;
- prices are quoted in `USD`;
- payment is accepted in `DAI`;
- the price for a given tier is linearly proportional to its rate limit.

For the initial deployment, we suggest the following values.

| Parameter                                                 | Symbol     | Value   | Units                             | Modifiable? | Comment                        |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------- | --------------------------------- | ----------- | ------------------------------ |
| Epoch length                                              | `epoch`    | `10`    | minutes                           | TBD         |                                |

> | Maximum total rate limit of concurrent active memberships | `R_{max}`  | TBD     | messages per `epoch`              | Yes         | Can be replaced with `N_{max}` |

Reviewer 2: Is that a contract parameter? or a calculation deduced from other parameters.

Actually, may be interesting to provide 2 values deduced from parameters:
- sustainable bandwidth usage: the bandwidth usage over several epoch if all members uses the max of their limit evenly distributed on epoch, probably multiplied by recommended gossipsub parameters
- max spike bandwidth usage: bandwidth usage if all members max out their rate limit at the same time, the fastest way possible.

Author: This is supposed to be a contract parameter, perhaps I should add a paragraph to make it clearer. My idea was that the contract should limit the total concurrent RLN bandwidth. If this is something we want to do, I see two ways to encode this restriction:

- limit the total number of concurrently active memberships;
- limit the total rate limit of those memberships.

The question is which of this parameters, or both, we should use.

| Maximum number of concurrent active memberships           | `N_{max}`  | `10000` | units                             | Yes         | Can be replaced with `R_{max}` |
| Rate limit for low-tier                                   | `R_{low}`  | `20`    | messages per `epoch`              | TBD         |                                |
| Rate limit for mid-tier                                   | `R_{mid}`  | `200`   | messages per `epoch`              | TBD         |                                |
| Rate limit for high-tier                                  | `R_{high}` | `600`   | messages per `epoch`              | TBD         |                                |

> | Unit price                                                | `p_u`      | TBD     | `USD` per `1` message per `epoch` | Yes         |                                |

Reviewer 2: What are we thinking?

Unit price of 1c:

- low-tier: 20c
- mid-tier: $2
- high-tier: $6

Per quarter

Author: BTW: I'll redefine the unit price to be "per membership expiration term", which is 90 days.

| Grace period                                              | `G`        | `30`    | days                              | Yes         |                                |

### Discussion on some parameter values

#### Epoch length

Epoch length is a global parameter set in the smart contract.
Rate limits are defined in terms of the maximum allowed messages per epoch.
There is a trade-off between short and long epochs.

On the one hand, longer epochs allow for short-term spikes,
which allows for more flexibility.
Arguably, short-term bursts followed by a period of silence is a common pattern for some use cases.
Usage peaks are expected to average out over longer time periods,
allowing us to reason about network utilization on a longer time scale.

On the other hand, long epochs lead to more memory requirements for nodes due to the growth of the nullifier log.
Each message contains a nullifier that proves its validity in terms of RLN.
Within the latest epoch, each relaying node stores all nullifiers to detect users exceeding the rate limit.
Each nullifier plus metadata is `128` bytes (per message).

> This means that one user with a `1` message per second rate limit (high-tier) generates up to `600 * 128 / 1024 = 75 KiB` of nullifier log data per 10-min epoch.

Reviewer 2: Would be good to clarify:
- so for 1000 users it's ...
- for 10,000 users, it's ...

As this would be the total data needed to be in memory.

#### Maximum total message limit / concurrently active memberships

We may want to limit the total rate limit available to all users.
The rationale is that the total network bandwidth is a limited resource.
The total active rate limit should not exceed the network's real capabilities.

There may be two ways to implement a global cap:

> - limit the total rate limits;

Reviewer 2: Is that possible?

Reviewer 3: It might also be worth clarifying how such total rate limits would be calculated - e.g. max number of memberships * msg size * msg/s = XYZ kB/s - since it seems like this is based on max bandwith of the network, but that depends on the max msg size, which is defined elsewhere

Author: > Is that possible?

Why wouldn't it be possible? Say, the contract would maintain a variable that is incremented at every membership registraction and decremented at every ~~expiration~~ invalidation (I mean, expiration is insufficient because of grace period). If a new membership registration would push the variable over the hard-coded limit (modifiable by the _Owner_), it would fail.

Author: > what we think is reasonable now, i.e. limit the total number of active membership

Perhaps I haven't phrased this well enough: my question here is which of the parameters, or both, we want to limit: the total number of active memberships, or their total rate limit. I'm not suggesting anything like

> adapting membership availability based on current total rate limit

Rather, I simply hesitate between two possible types of restrictions:

1. the total number of active memberships `n` cannot exceed `N`;
2. the total rate limit of active memberships `x` cannot exceed `X` messages per epoch,

where `N` and `X` are hard-coded, _Owner_-modifiable variables.

The former can be somewhat imprecise, as `N` high-tier memberships are different than `N` low-tier memberships in the total burden they impose on the network. That said, there are some aspects (e.g., tree size?) that increase proportionally to `n`, not to `x`. Therefore, I'd suggest using both limits, and fail a registration attempt if a new membership would violate either one.

Reviewer 2: Ah yes thanks. Not sure how I interpreted it at first read but makes sense now.

Yes I agree that ultimately, we want to limit the total rate, ie, the sum of allowed rate limit of all active membership.

Maybe it's a question of whether we want to have this now or later. I think if it's not too complicated, we do it now.

If we limit the total rate, so not sure if it's helpful to also limit the total number of members. Except if it's technically necessary. Eg at some point we discussed to initialize the merkle tree at deployement with zerod leaf. In this case we need to set a size at deployment.

In terms of decrementing, I assume it would happen in 2 scenarios:

- current member withdraw their deposit
- OR, new member takes an expired slot with a different rate limit

Author: > if it's helpful to also limit the total number of members. Except if it's technically necessary.

My concern is that if we don't limit the total number of members, we'd enable some DoS attack where the tree is polluted by a large number of memberships. Although we can likely prevent this by introducing a minimal rate limit (assuming a curve-based scheme). If the total rate limit must be below `X`, and each membership must have a rate limit above `Y`, then the total number of memberships cannot be higher than `X/Y`.

In short: I would suggest implementing an upper bound on the total rate limit of all^ memberships and a lower bound on the rate limit of one membership.

^ All, not just _active_: memberships in _grace-period_ and _expired_ states also allow sending messages, therefore, I think they should count towards the limit as well. _Erased_ memberships don't count (they've been removed from the tree at that point).

Based on these criteria, we suggest accepting DAI for the initial deployment.
Other tokens may be added in the future.

#### Grace period and membership extension

On the one hand, memberships must expire,
otherwise a one-time payment would give a user the right to potentially infinite resource usage.
On the other hand, the “soft” expiration suggested above is likely sufficient
while balancing abuse prevention and ease of implementation:

- although extending a membership doesn’t require a new deposit, keeping the original deposit locked up plus paying gas fees imposes cost on membership extension;
- a legitimate user is unlikely to risk their membership being taken over at any moment by not renewing their membership.

## Implementation Suggestions

The current version of the contract (RLNv2) is deployed on Sepolia testnet ([source code](https://github.com/waku-org/waku-rlnv2-contract/blob/main/src/WakuRlnV2.sol)).

## Security / Privacy Considerations

Requesting a Merkle proof for one's own membership through a third-party RPC provider may endanger the requester's privacy.

## Future work

In the future version of RLN contract, the following research directions might be pursued:

> - deposit slashing for misbehaving users;

Reviewer 2: Maybe be have a rough order of likelihood? I don't think it make sense to have it first in the list when we currently don't think we'll ever need it.

Author: I'm tending towards removing the "future work" section altogether, as it is largely speculative. I suggest we add individual ideas mentioned in "future work" if and when they're at least somewhat likely to be implemented.

- extracting revenue by e.g. only allowing partial deposit withdrawal;

> - incentivization for relaying nodes;

Reviewer 2: Do we want that? it seems that our previous research concluded this is extremely complex.

- non-proportional pricing (e.g., high-tier discounts);
- accepting other tokens;
- making memberships transferable (e.g., in the form of an NFT);

> - establishing a free relaying market by economically linking demand with supply;

Reviewer 2: I know it's not a list of promises but is that something we are actually considering? cc @jm-clius

Reviewer 3: Also is this really relevant for RLN spec?

Author: TBH, I included this section largely because of my academic habits, as research papers normally inculde "future work" even if you don't plan to implement anything yourself, more as a guidance to other researchers who would want to build on top of your work. It may well be the case that we don't needed future work in a spec. Or, perhaps, we could include a few points that are most likely to get implemented in the foreseeable future (AFAICT, slashing is not one of those).

Before sending messages, users must register in a smart contract.
They then attach a ZK proof of valid membership to every message.
Relaying nodes check message validity and drop invalid messages.

A message is considered valid in terms of RLN if:
- its sender has an active RLN membership; and
- the sender hasn't exceeded their rate limit within the current epoch.

RLN is managed by a smart contract that keeps track of active memberships.
Users interact with the contract to register a new membership and
to obtain Merkle proofs and the tree root,
which is necessary for proof generation and verification.

In testnet deployment, the RLN contract does not require any payment apart from gas costs.
This document aims to make the RLN contract suitable for mainnet deployment.
In particular, the contract would require users to put down a deposit.
The aim of the deposit initially is purely to protect the system from denial-of-service attacks using bandwidth capping.
It may also be explored as a revenue stream for Waku in later versions.

## Semantics

The RLN contract provides the following functionalities:
- register a membership in a given tier;
- check if a membership is valid;

> - withdraw the deposit for an expired membership;

Author: For the initial mainnet deployment at least, the idea is that the deposit only serves as a barrier against abuse rather than payment for the service. Though one might argue that the depositor bears the opportunity cost of not investing this capital elsewhere (i.e., the service is not free even if the deposit is 100% refundable), the contract doesn't get a cut of the deposits as of this version.

- get a merkle proof
- get the merkle tree (root?)

For the _Contract Owner_, the contract provides the following additional functionality:
- change the modifiable parameters (see parameter table below);
- (TBD) freeze certain functionality (e.g., in case of an attack, stop new registrations, deposit withdrawals, etc).

In the initial deployment:
- there is no slashing;
- membership expiration includes a grace period;
- a user can extend their membership without putting up any additional deposit.

### Membership life-cycle

To register a membership, a user locks up a deposit.
Each membership has an expiration date.
After a membership expires, it enters a grace period, during which the user can extend it.

> Extending a membership requires no additional deposit.

Reviewer 2: Not doing extra payment is in line with TKE's proposal.

> Extending a membership requires no additional deposit.

Author: I'll add some justification rephrased from that proposal.

The user can extend the membership both during and after its grace period.
By not extending the membership before the grace period expires, the user assumes the risk of the membership being taken over at any moment.

A user can hold multiple memberships.
Memberships are not transferable.
There is no limitation on the number of membership per user (apart from the global limits, see parameter table).

## Contract governance and mutability

The contract governance is as follows:

1. the first deployment of the contract allows the `Owner` to modify certain parameters (TBD) under certain constraints (TBD);
2. at some point, the `Onwer` would renounce their privileges, and the contract will become immutable;
3. further upgrades, if necessary, can be done by deploying a new contract and migrating the membership set.

## Parameters

We make the following design choices:

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Author: Sounds reasonable to me. I'd consider two questions here:

1. What is simpler from the UI perspective: to offer one of three options to a user, or to let them pick a point inside an interval? Perhaps, we could do both: offer three default values and also support custom rate limits (under "advanced settings" or something) - similar to how wallets let you choose your gas price.
2. What would be simpler to implement - three tiers with hard-coded rate limits, or letting a user choose any point inside an interval, and calculate the membership price by multiplying a hard-coded unit price (the price of 1 message / epoch) by the chosen rate limit? ( @richard-ramos , any thoughts? )

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Reviewer 2: > What is simpler from the UI perspective: to offer one of three options to a user, or to let them pick a point inside an interval?

This question could be left to the UI implementation. Giving more flexibility to the developer.

I think it's a good idea to give flexibility here. Because with the flexibility, we can let the app dev decides what rate limit they want to offer to their user (or buy for their users).

The main question will be upgradability:
- With 3 tiers, we could change the prices on the same contract, and move from a linear to an exponential model. We can also decide if we hardcoded 3 tiers. Or use a map so we can have N tiers (and start with 3).
- with a `SOME_CONST` multiplier, we can change the const, but we won't be able to change the curve. OR, we actually have 2 parameters:
  - the constant
  -  the curve, ie, arithmetic operator we apply. Can be multiplier at first, then moved to log or exp etc

@richard-ramos , thoughts?

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Author: I'm leaning towards a curve-based solution as more generalizable and updatable.

Let's define a function that takes as input the desired rate limit and outputs its price. Initially, that function will just multiply the rate limit by a constant. Later, we could replace it with a function consisting of multiple linear intervals (e.g., rates under `R1` cost `X1` per unit, rates between `R1` and `R2` cost `X2` per unit, etc, where `X1 > X2 > ...`). Ultimately, it could be a continious function like in AMMs, which for me looks like the most universal option.

Possible drawbacks:
- generalized price calculation will likely consume more gas than picking a price out of, say, three hard-coded prices for three tiers;
- I'm not sure how the _Owner_ would upgrade the price function. Can a variable be (re-)assigned a function value in Solidity? Ideally, an _Owner_-initiated price function upgrade would be something like `price_funcion = lambda x: sqrt(x)`; is this possible? If not, what's the alternative?

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Author: > budget limit, i.e., 1ETH per month

It's not obvious to me how to add this feature to the current design. To clarify: as per the current spec spec, users don't pay per messages per se. A user locks up a deposit, the size of which depends on the rate limit they choose, and withdraws that deposit in full after their membership enters its grace period (i.e., "soft-expires"). In other words, the deposit doesn't get consumed by user's messages. In future versions of this spec we might consider only allowing partial deposit withdrawal (i.e., keeping part of the deposit as payment for the service), but that's out of scope for now.

> I consider it crucial to have a free tier

Wouldn't we open an attack vector here? We don't have an identity system, so with a free tier anyone would be able register a million memberships and overwhelm the network.

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Reviewer: > Wouldn't we open an attack vector here? We don't have an identity system, so with a free tier anyone would be able register a million memberships and overwhelm the network.

I don't think so. The registration process incurs charges to the user. I don't think anyone will register 1 million times.

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Author: > The registration process incurs charges to the user.

Hm, doesn't the free tier imply free registration? It feels like we're talking about different things here, but I'm not sure where the misunderstanding comes from.

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Reviewer 5: From simplicity to implement, the easiest would be to have N tiers, but assuming the contract is upgradable, it should be possible to implement the curve mechanism and in case we want to change the curve, we'd upgrade the contract to use a different curve

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Author: > in case we want to change the curve, we'd upgrade the contract

Does this imply that there would be a main contract that calls a different curve contract, and the latter would be replaced in case of an upgrade?

> I can try to implement an example of how would that look

Thanks, I don't think there is a need to implement a full example for now. I just want to make sure that the spec doesn't contain something that is overly complicated from the implementer's standpoint. Considering your comment, I'm leaning towards a curve-based mechanism with a linear curve function to start with. It looks more elegant to me than hard-coded tiers; and tiers can be implemented anyway as suggested rate limits on the application level.

> - there are `3` membership tiers: low-, mid-, and high-tier;

Reviewer 2: @Ivansete-status 

> The speed at which that user quota is spent depends on the usage. The more usage, the quickest the budget is consumed.

This is not how RLN work, no one track a quota per user in the system.

> Does this imply that there would be a main contract that calls a different curve contract, and the latter would be replaced in case of an upgrade?

Came here to suggest that. I am guessing the simplest way is:
- main contract has a field for "curve contract"address
- "curve contract"'s ABI is `f(a, b): c`
Then several curve contract can be deployed and admin changes the "curve contract address".

Would be interesting to check gas. a map might be the cheapest and simplest way (and most foolproof as well)

| Rate limit for mid-tier                                   | `R_{mid}`  | `200`   | messages per `epoch`                                                                 | TBD         |                                |
| Rate limit for high-tier                                  | `R_{high}` | `600`   | messages per `epoch`                                                                 | TBD         |                                |
| Unit price                                                | `p_u`      | TBD     | `USD` per `1` message per `epoch` for the duration of one membership expiration term | Yes         |                                |
| Membership expiration term                                | `T`        | `90`    | days                                                                                 | Yes         |                                |
| Grace period                                              | `G`        | `30`    | days                                                                                 | Yes         |                                |

### Discussion on some parameter values

#### Epoch length

> Epoch length is a global parameter set in the smart contract.

Author: I'd say the main benefit of incoding an epoch in the contract is that we can piggyback on the underlying ~~timechain~~ blockchain as a time signal. We need at least a rough consensus on what the current time is, otherwise (in a hypothetical future protocol version with slashing) innocent nodes may be punished because of a network split w.r.t. what the current epoch is.

> Epoch length is a global parameter set in the smart contract.

Reviewer 2: Sorry reopening that. I think there are 2 decisions here being discussed.

1. What epoch length do nodes use to verify message validity on gossipsub
2. What current time do nodes use to verify message validity on gossipsub.

I am assuming @alrevuelta was referring to (1). Currently, the epoch length is harcoded in Waku client code, specifically on cluster parameters.
The question is whether this is moved to the smart contract. Meaning that nodes should query/listen to smart contract to decide epoch length.

I thinks whether we do it in code or smart contract depends on 2 factors:

a. How do we expect a change of this value to happen for an existing cluster
b. Do we expect different clusters to use same RLN contract, and if so, with same epoch length value.

It seems to me that (a) becomes very hard if we keep the length in the code. As a different value leads to network split. Meaning reducing stability of the network during a migration.
Hence, I think it would make sense to have the value in (a), probably accompanied with a "start time". Meaning that nodes can be informed of the new value from the smart contract and from when this new value needs to be applied.

In terms of (b), who do we expect to start a new cluster with same smart contract? us/Status? or external project? In any case, then could deploy a smart contract that delegate all calls to original smart contract, except for the `getEpochLength` function and set their own.

Hence, it seems that setting epoch length in the smart contract is the most future proof option.

---

Regarding (2). Due to the granularity of block time (20s on mainnet? how long on L2s?), I am not convinced it would work for gossipsub. If that's something we want to do, we will need to study it properly first. So I'd suggest no for now, and we can book the work if we see it necessary.

> Epoch length is a global parameter set in the smart contract.

Author: Regarding (1), I agree that

> setting epoch length in the smart contract is the most future proof option.

I'm not sure I understand this point:

> Due to the granularity of block time (20s on mainnet? how long on L2s?), I am not convinced it would work for gossipsub. If that's something we want to do, we will need to study it properly first.

What do you mean by "it"? How do nodes currently understand what the time is?

Moreover, it seems to me that there is a third question here:

3. How do nodes know what the current epoch is to verify message validity on gossipsub

Just knowing the epoch length and the current time is insufficient to determine what the current epoch is. The node would additionally need to know either of:

a. the global timestamp at which the first epoch began (and derive the current epoch locally); or
b. the current epoch as reported by other nodes (or by the smart contract? or by the blockchain itself via its block headers?).

AFAIU, each message (in particular, its proof) is committed to a particular epoch. My high-level concern here is that message validity depends on Relay nodes being (more-or-less?) in sync w.r.t. what the current epoch is. Lacking a full-fledged consensus, we cannot guarantee synchronization, unless we piggyback on the underlying blockchain (L1, L2, doesn't matter) that provides this functionality by design (at least in terms of block heights if not physical timestamps).

Does it make sense, or am I misunderstanding something?

> Epoch length is a global parameter set in the smart contract.

Author: Now I finally understand how this works (h/t @rymnc):
1. we assume every node has (more or less) precise time signal;
1. every node derives the epoch number by dividing the current UNIX timestamp by epoch length ([code](https://github.com/waku-org/nwaku/blob/71d4a11647a905d16340c5ba4d95a6082e6cda0a/waku/waku_rln_relay/rln_relay.nim#L93-L97)).

In other words, RLN epoch numbers don't (and don't have to) start with zero or one.

For now I am leaving the spec as is w.r.t encoding epoch length in the contract as "the most future proof" option.

The rationale is that the total network bandwidth is a limited resource.
The total active rate limit should not exceed the network's real capabilities.

There may be two ways to implement a global cap:
- limit the total rate limits;
- limit the total number of active memberships (e.g., at 10K memberships).

#### Proportional pricing

We suggest proportional pricing for simplicity.
Proportional pricing means that if tier A offers N times the limit of tier B, then tier A is N times more expensive than tier B.

An alternative approach could be bulk discounts for high-tier memberships.
Discounts are more efficient but promote centralization.
Finding the right trade-off remains subject for future work.

#### Accepted tokens

When choosing a token to accept, we consider the following criteria:

- a stablecoin: USD-denominated pricing is simpler for users and for developers (avoiding an oracle);
- popular, high liquidity;
- preferably decentralized;
- with a reasonably good track record w.r.t. censorship.

Based on these criteria, we suggest accepting DAI for the initial deployment.
Other tokens may be added in the future.

#### Grace period and membership extension

> Membership extension does not require a new deposit.

Reviewer: What does membership extension mean? I think there should be a monthly payment

Author: We don't plan a monthly payment for this version.  The current vision is that a user locks up a deposit and withdraws it afterwards. The rationale is:
- it protects the network from DoS;
- it doesn't open up difficult questions of who manages the revenue and how it is distributed.

Extension just means that the membership returns into _active_ status. No deposit is necessary (idea from [this proposal](https://www.notion.so/RLN-Proposal-Draft-da716bd4020b4f8a9b217a1e71ba825a) by Tokenomics), however, opportunity cost of locked-up capital and gas fees for extension transaction make it not completely free. The assumption here is that such scheme is sufficient for the initial mainnet deployment and can be extended later.

The full specification of Relay node behavior is out of scope for this document.

A Relay node MUST relay a message unless:
- the message is committed to a different epoch than the current epoch; or
- the user has exceed their allowed rate limit for the current epoch; or
- the RLN proof fails to prove that the message sender owns an existing membership.

### Extend a membership

Extending a membership is subject to the following condition:
- extension MUST fail if the membership is in any state other than _GracePeriod_;
- the membership owner MUST be able to extend the membership;
- any user except the membership owner MUST NOT be able to extend the membership;
- after a successful extension, the membership MUST become _Active_.

Owning a membership means controlling the private key from which the RLN commitment ID (i.e., public key) was derived.

### Withdraw the deposit

Deposit withdrawal is subject to the following conditions:
- the owner of a membership MUST be able to withdraw their deposit;
- any user except the membership owner MUST NOT be able to withdraw its deposit;
- a deposit MUST be withdrawn in full;

> - a withdrawal MUST fail if the membership is not in _GracePeriod_, _Expired_, or _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_;

Author: The owner of a membership may choose do withdraw in either of the following states: _GracePeriod_, _Expired_, or _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_. Gas costs may differ depending on the state. When withdrawing during _GracePeriod_ or _Expired_, the user assumes the gas cost of erasing the membership from the tree. In contrast, at _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_, the membership has already been erased from the tree (the owner of the overtaking new membership paid the cost).

There may be two issues with this state of affairs:
- there is no incentive for a user to withdraw during _GracePeriod_ even if they no longer need the membership (apart from the opportunity cost of the locked-up capital) - instead, users may choose to wait until _Expired_ and withdraw or the same gas cost;
- users don't pay the price of their expired memberships polluting the tree, increasing costs for Relay nodes (again, apart from the opportunity cost).

All in all, if the cost of locked-up capital is negligible (which it arguably is at currently recommended prices), users may only withdraw from _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_, and transfer the cost of tree cleanup onto new registrations. If we think this is an issue, we can think of additional incentivization to withdraw early, that is, in the ideal case, a user should withdraw (and erase their membership in the process) as soon as they no longer needs RLN functionality. An example of such incentivization would be to burn part of the deposit in proportion to the time the membership has spent in the _Expired_ or _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_ state.

Author: Let's leave this a question for future work. I don't think this incentive incompatibility, if we even can call it that, would affect much in the first spec iteration.

Reviewer 2: Interesting concept. Maybe something to think about in terms of gas optimization for the contract cc @richard-ramos .

This may be possible to influence based on the various indexing maps used to keep track.

editor: Sergei Tikhomirov <sergei@status.im>
contributors:
---

## Abstract

This document describes membership management for the RLN smart contract, in particular:
- membership-related contract functionality;
- suggested parameters valued for the initial mainnet deployment;
- contract governance and upgradability.

This document currently only considers membership-related functionality.
It might later evolve into a full-fledged contract specification.

RLN is only deployed on Sepolia testnet ([source code](https://github.com/waku-org/waku-rlnv2-contract/blob/main/src/WakuRlnV2.sol)) as of August 2024.
This document aims to outline the path to its mainnet deployment.

## Background

Rate-Limiting Nullifier (RLN) is a ZK-based gadget used for privacy-preserving rate limiting in Waku.
The RLN smart contract is the core element of RLN architecture.
The smart contract stores the RLN tree that contains all currently existing memberships.
Users interact with the contract to manage their memberships
and to get the necessary data for proof generation and verification.

Sending messages is handled by Waku Relay nodes.
To send a message, the sender MUST attach a ZK-proof to the message.

> A Relay node MUST relay a message unless:

Author: I asked ChatGPT about the semantics of MUST if its prescription can't be enforced, and its summary was:

> "MUST" in RFC 2119 defines a mandatory requirement for compliance with a specification, even if there is no practical way to enforce that behavior on every node. It sets clear expectations for what is necessary for correct and interoperable implementation, meaning that if a node does not follow a "MUST" directive, it is considered non-compliant, regardless of whether or not there is an enforcement mechanism to ensure adherence.

> A Relay node MUST relay a message unless:

Author: In any case, this is up to the RLN Relay spec to define. I'm changing our formulation to "MUST NOT relay invalid messages" (there's no issues with this anyway) and let the RLN Relay spec define the rest.

- the message belongs to any epoch other than the current one; or
- the user has exceed their allowed rate limit for the current epoch; or
- the ZK-proof fails to prove that the sender holds a membership.

The full specification of Relay is out of scope for this document.

## Contract overview

The contract MUST provide the following functionalities:
- register a membership;
- extend a membership;

> - withdraw a deposit.

Author: By "provide the following functionalities" I meant `public` functions. As per the state transition diagram, the user has just three possible actions: `register`, `extend`, and `withdraw`. Membership expiry happens "automatically" after the grace period is over (although it's only updated lazily in storage).

> expire a membership

Do you mean that this list should include the "internal" functionality of the contract, in addition to it's public-facing fucntions?

> withdraw a deposit after membership expiry

From a user's perspective, `withdraw` is a unified function, no matter if the membership has expired or not. The contract implementation will of course handle the withdrawal request differently depending on the membership state, but the user, ideally, shouldn't care.

Does this make sense, or have I misunderstood your comment?

Contract parameters and their RECOMMENDED values for the initial mainnet deployment are as follows:

| Parameter                                   | Symbol    | Value   | Units                              |
| ------------------------------------------- | --------- | ------- | ---------------------------------- |
| Epoch length                                | `epoch`   | `10`    | minutes                            |
| Maximum total rate limit of all memberships | `R_{max}` | `20000` | messages per `epoch`               |

> | Minimal rate limit of one membership        | `r_{min}` | `20`    | messages per `epoch`               |

Reviewer 4: Do we set the maximum somewhere? Presumably we want to prevent one membership from dominating the total available rate?

Author: My initial reaction was - sure, let's introduce a maximum. But thinking about it a bit more, I'm not so certain.

An attacher who wants can easily register many memberships to dominate the total rate. We don't have an identity mechanism to stop it. Even if we limit the number of memberships per Ethereum address (currently we explicitly allow it), the attacker would create as many addresses as needed.

Should we specify a restriction that we can't enforce? Or can we?

Reviewer 2: Another point on this is that the max rate limit is an issue for project integrating Waku. By not setting one, we give more flexibility for projects to discover and play with right parameter.
The only issue being all project overshooting the rate limit and depleting it without the actual usage being anywhere near the rate limit.

Which then is an argument in favour of a max, to ensure projects/application developers don't overshoot. Especially consider how cheap a membership is.

Author: Based on our discussion elsewhere, I've set the max rate limit for one membership to 600 msg / epoch (= 1 msg / s at the recommended epoch length).

> | Maximum total rate limit of all memberships | `R_{max}` | `20000` | messages per `epoch`               |

Reviewer 2: That's 5Mbps, right? for the network, around 0.6Mbps per shard.

Shall we start higher? 3200 -> 8Mbps for network, around 1Mbps per shard.

Author: 20 thousand was pulled from an earlier document, I don't have a strong personal opinion here.

However, I vaguely remember some internal research on what the average (median?) connection speeds are, and the conclusion was that in Africa, the slowest continent in that respect, it's 10 (??) Mbps, so if we want Waku to work globally, we should think of this bandwidth cap. Is this true, and is this relevant?

Author: I'm changing to 160'000 for now, let's revisit this later if there are any issues.

> | Price of `1` message per epoch              | `p_u`     | `0.01`  | `USD` per one period of length `T` |

Author: I think @fryorcraken suggested this price point. To clarify: 1 cent doesn't buy you just one message, it buys you the right to sent 1 message _every_ epoch (10 minutes in our case) for the duration of your membership (90 days + grace period of 30 days + undefined time until your membership's tree slot is overtaken, if you haven't withdrawn earlier).

> | Price of `1` message per epoch              | `p_u`     | `0.01`  | `USD` per one period of length `T` |

Reviewer 2: Maybe rephrase the parameter name, something like

> Membership price for `1` message per epoch

> | Price of `1` message per epoch              | `p_u`     | `0.01`  | `USD` per one period of length `T` |

Reviewer 2: Maybe too cheap: https://github.com/waku-org/specs/pull/30/files#r1717772482

> | Price of `1` message per epoch              | `p_u`     | `0.01`  | `USD` per one period of length `T` |

Author: In the absense of other suggestions, I'm 5x'ing the price of the unit rate limit to 0.05 USD.

> | Membership expiration term                  | `T`       | `90`    | days                               |

Reviewer 4: Intuition here is that `90` days may be too short. Wouldn't year long memberships be more useful? Requiring user action every 3 months would be a frequent burden on the app or end users.

Author: As far as I recall (I couldn't find the comment quickly), initially we discussed 1 year, then @fryorcraken suggested 3 or 6 months, and I picked the former. The rationale was that during initial development stages we don't want users to be committed to the contract as it existed at their registration time, as the _Owner_ (i.e., we) might change parameter values relatively frequently.

Do you think 6 months could be a reasonable middle ground? Plus 1 month of grace period.

Reviewer 4: No strong opinions, but I'd indeed feel more comfortable with 6 months.

Reviewer 2: 6 months sound good

Author: Great, let's make it 6 months (180 days, defining a month as 30 days).

| Membership grace period                     | `G`       | `30`    | days                               |

## Membership lifecycle

Any existing membership MUST always be in exactly one of the following states:
- _Active_;
- _GracePeriod_;
- _Expired_;
- _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_;
- _Erased_.

```mermaid
graph TD;
    NonExistent --> |"register"| Active;

>     Active --> |"time T passed"| GracePeriod;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Active -.-> |"time T passed"| GracePeriod;
```

Might help with visual to differentiate time based state changed to transaction based ones

    GracePeriod --> |"extend"| Active;
    GracePeriod --> |"time G passed"| Expired;
    GracePeriod --> |"withdraw"| Erased;

>     Expired --> |"withdraw"| Erased;

Author: No, and this is intentional: we want to discourage withdrawals immediately after registration, as this functionality may be interpreted as money laundering. Perhaps we could think of a mechanism where early withdrawal incurs a penalty, and after some time (say, 50+% of the membership duration elapsed) you can withdraw in full... That looks for me like a discussion for the next iteration of the spec.

    Expired --> |"another membership reuses slot"| ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal;

>     ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal --> |"withdraw"| Erased;

Reviewer 4: Do we expect any state bloat if multiple (or most) users don't withdraw their deposit, having forgotten or not caring about the nominal amount?

Author: Fair point.

I would expect the bloat to not be as severe as if the membership were stored in the tree forever, but it's still `O(N)` in the number of users. How bad would it be if the contract would need to store, say, 10 thousand records like "user A's deposit of amount X awaits withdrawal"? Perhaps @richard-ramos has a more informed opinion on this question?

If this in indeed an issue, a natural solution would be to introduce a deadline, after which a deposit can't be withdrawn. The question is then, what happens to the money? One solution is to simply burn it (cf. "we don't have to touch users' funds"). I'm curious whether there are other feasible options.

Author: Based on the discussion elsewhere, I'm leaving this question for future work.

| State                    | Included in the RLN tree |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------ |
| _Active_                 | Yes                      |
| _GracePeriod_            | Yes                      |
| _Expired_                | Yes                      |
| _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_ | No                       |
| _Erased_                 | No                       |

Memberships MUST NOT be transferable.
A user MAY use one Ethereum address to manage multiple memberships.
A user MAY use one Waku node to manage multiple memberships. [^1]

[^1]: No Waku implementation supports managing multiple memberships from one node (as of August 2024).

## Contract functionalities

Availability of membership-specific functionalities MUST be as follows:

|                       | Active | GracePeriod | Expired | ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal | Erased |
| --------------------- | ------ | ----------- | ------- | ---------------------- | ------ |
| Send a message        | Yes    | Yes         | Yes     | No                     | No     |
| Extend the membership | No     | Yes         | No      | No                     | No     |

> | Withdraw the deposit  | No     | Yes         | Yes     | Yes                    | No     |

Author: Do you think we should prevent the scenario when a user deposits and immediately withdraws?

> | Withdraw the deposit  | No     | Yes         | Yes     | Yes                    | No     |

Reviewer 2: > IMHO, the user should be able to always withdraw the deposit when "Active"

Any reason why?

It seems safer at this point in time to not allow it.

If we want to allow it, I think we should review the impact of a tree update at every single block on a L2. Some L2 have a block time of 0.25s. If the merkle root changes 4 times in a second, what are the chances of a network split due to the fact that the nodes start to use different merkle root? I know we have merkle root range, but what is the current value? Should this value be increased then? What would be the impact on memory? etc.

Safest root is to not allow it. If that's something requested/desired, we can then do a proper review.

> | Withdraw the deposit  | No     | Yes         | Yes     | Yes                    | No     |

Author: Not disagreeing with your conclusion @fryorcraken , but don't we have the risk of

> a tree update at every single block

with the current scheme as well? If there are sufficiently many memberships in _GracePeriod_, their users might withdraw one after another every block. In general, user actions that trigger tree updates (`register` and `withdraw` from _GracePeriod_ or _Expired_) can happen at any time, which includes the scenario when they happen every block (moreover, this is inevitable with sufficiently many users).

> | Extend the membership | No     | Yes         | No      | No                     | No     |

Reviewer 2: I wondered if we should allow extending when expired.
I think not, because it introduces possible transaction failure when 2 transactions come in at the same time, one to extend and one to register on the expired slot.
ie, current proposal sounds good.

Author: I agree with your conclusion but I'm not sure that

> it introduces possible transaction failure when 2 transactions come in at the same time

is a relevant argument here.

Every state with multiple outgoing edges can incur a race condition when transitions to different states are triggered at around the same time. For example: a user tries to `withdraw` one second before the grace period `G` expires. Or: a user tries to `withdraw` from an `Expired` membership, and a new registrations comes in that tries to overtake that slot.

I don't see the race condition itself as an issue here. After all, the underlying blockchain is there exactly to resolve race conditions.

Sending a message is included here for completeness,
although it is part of the Relay protocol and not the RLN contract.

### Register a membership

Membership registration is subject to the following conditions:
- if there are _Expired_ memberships in the RLN tree, the new membership MUST overwrite an _Expired_ membership;
- the new membership SHOULD overwrite the membership that had been _Expired_ for the longest time;
- if a new membership A overwrites an _Expired_ membership B:
	- membership B MUST become _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_;
	- the current total rate limit MUST be decremented by the rate limit of membership B;
	- the contract MUST take all necessary steps to ensure that the holder of membership B can withdraw their deposit later;
- registration MUST fail if the total rate limit of _Active_, _GracePeriod_, and _Expired_ memberships, including the one being created, would exceed the maximum total rate;

> - registration MUST fail if the requested rate limit for a new membership is lower than the minimal allowed rate limit;

Reviewer 4: See my comment elsewhere. I think we'll have to define a maximum allowed rate limit too.

- the user MUST lock-up a deposit to register a membership;
- the user MUST specify the rate limit of the new membership[^2];
- the size of the deposit MUST depend on the requested rate limit;
- in case of a successful registration:
	- the new membership MUST become _Active_;
	- the current total rate limit MUST be incremented by the rate limit of the new membership;
- a newly created membership MUST have an expiration time `T` and a grace period `G`.

[^2]: A user-facing application SHOULD suggest default values for rate limits for the user.

### Extend a membership

Extending a membership is subject to the following conditions:
- extension MUST fail if the membership is in any state other than _GracePeriod_;
- the membership holder MUST be able to extend their membership;
- any user except the membership holder MUST NOT be able to extend a membership;
- after a successful extension, the membership MUST become _Active_.

> Holding a membership means controlling the private key from which the RLN commitment ID (i.e., public key) was derived.

Reviewer 2: _private key/public key/derive_ are not term we usually used for RLN, I am worried it can bring confusion.
It's usually _secret/commitment/(poseidon) hash_

> the membership holder MUST be able to extend their membership;

You are saying that the smart contract should determine membership holder based on the RLN commitment. Meaning that some proof of knowing the secret to the RLN commitment should be passed to extend.

I'd suggest to simplify this and assume that from a smart contract pov, the membership holder is the smart contract/ethereum account that send the registration transaction.

Reviewer 2: Also move this definition under "Register a membership" and have a bullet point:

> - the membership holder is defined as....

Reviewer 2: Yes it absolutely make sense and indeed, the choice is not as trivial as I first thought.

It seems that the choice is what the user is most likely to **not loose**. Ethereum wallet seed or RLN secret/keystore.

When  withdrawing a deposit, does the deposit go back to original address or to address used to initiate the withdraw transaction? I assume latter.

I think it is fair to assume that the user secured their Ethereum wallet and do not loose access to it.

I do not expect this to be as clear cut for the RLN keystore.

If a user install a Waku app, gets the RLN membership, then desinstall/delete/change device. keystore maybe lost.

Whereas the wallet they used may still be accessible, or even if they use status wallet, they are expected to backup their seed and potentially import it in another wallet. They can then get their deposit back using a web portal.
Whereas they are unlikely to be able to import their RLN keystore in another app.

At this point in time, I would say it would be more fool proof to assume the security of the wallet, not the RLN keystore, and hence assume ownership based on the ethereum address used for registration.

We can then evolve that, and possibly allow either. We will also have to review subsidization scenarios.
If project X subsidize RLN membership for users, then user should not be able to withdraw deposit.
Payer and user may be different entities. Which is an argument to enable deposit withdraw on ethereum address.

WDYT @jm-clius ?

Author: I'd also add that the answer may depend on whether we're thinking more in terms of a service provider model, or a model where end-users manage their own memberships. In the former case, I'd expect professional entities to be more likely to e.g. rotate Ethereum addresses, have multiple addresses for cold- and hot-storage, etc. That for me indicates that a separate RLN-level identity is more suitable. In the latter case, I'd agree that the end user is more likely to lose their RLN seed phrase than their Ethereum seed phrase, as their Ethereum address might also hold value unrelated to RLN.

Reviewer 2: >  I'd expect professional entities to be more likely to e.g. rotate Ethereum addresses, have multiple addresses for cold- and hot-storage, etc

Keen to get infra's thought on this.

To summarize for infra, in terms of withdrawing funds from the RLN smart contract, either:

A. The Ethereum account originally used to register a membership must be used to withdraw the funds.

OR

B. Any Ethereum address can be used, but a zk-proof to own the RLN membership must be passed (proof to be generated with a provided script etc).

Side note, B is likely to make gas cost higher as more data is needed to be passed.

Reviewer 6: I always prefer simpler solutions, both to use and understand, so I'd go with A.

Author: OK, then I'm introducing these definitions:
- a _holder_ is the one who controls the RLN secret;
- a _keeper_ is the one who controls the Ethereum address;
- the contract only uses keeper / non-keeper as authorization criterion (that is, we only allow extending and withdrawing from the same Ethereum address; no RLN proof necessary).

Reviewer 2: To make the definition generic for AA, EOA etc, I believe the right terminlogy would be: the _keeper_ is the _sender_ of the transaction registering the membership.

Author: Fair pint. I'm not sure however that the term "sender" is clear enough, as it might mean:

- `msg.sender` in Solidity semantics;
- the one who pays for gas (paymaster);
- the one who first broadcasts the transaction into the network (which is Infura in most cases).

What we need here is a cryptographic identity that would link a user to their membership from registration to withdrawal. The cleanest way to do so would be to use our app-specific identity (aka RLN ID), but as a temporary solution to simplify initial implementation, we're piggy-backing on the Ethereum addresses as identity provider. I'm not sure we can guarantee that this scheme will work for all future Ethereum developments, in particular the de-coupling of various services such as transaction signing, gas payment, broadcasting, etc.

Given that, would it make sense to explicitly state that we only support EOAs for the inintial implementation?

Reviewer 2: By _sender_ I mean exactly `msg.sender` in solidity semantics.

Reviewer 2: >  I'm not sure we can guarantee that this scheme will work for all future Ethereum developments

I would expect we are not the only one with this problem and it may be worth investigating, at some point, what is done in the ecosystem. AFAIK, the usage of `msg.sender` is the regular practice. This, or usage of signature such as EIP-712.

Author: Added a [clarification](https://github.com/waku-org/specs/pull/34/commits/818ce9847672c6b27a91c81d0c6794224179cf24).

### Withdraw the deposit

Deposit withdrawal is subject to the following conditions:
- the membership holder MUST be able to withdraw their deposit;
- any user except the membership holder MUST NOT be able to withdraw its deposit;
- a deposit MUST be withdrawn in full;
- a withdrawal MUST fail if the membership is not in _GracePeriod_, _Expired_, or _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_;
- a membership MUST become _Erased_ after withdrawal.

## Governance and upgradability

At initial mainnet deployment, the contract MUST have an _Owner_.
The _Owner_ MUST be able to change the values of all contract parameters.
The _Owner_ MUST be able to pause any of the following contract functionalities:
- register a membership;
- extend a membership;
- withdraw a deposit.

At some point, the _Owner_ SHOULD renounce their privileges, and the contract MUST become immutable.
Further upgrades, if necessary, SHOULD be done by deploying a new contract and migrating the membership set.

## Implementation Suggestions

> User-facing application SHOULD suggest a few rate limits (tiers) to simplify their users' choice.
> The RECOMMENDED rate limits in a three-tier model are as follows:
> - `20` messages per epoch as low-tier;
> - `200` messages per epoch as mid-tier;
> - `600` messages per epoch as high-tier.
> Users SHOULD be able to select a custom rate limit under advanced settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User-facing application SHOULD suggest one or a few rate limits (tiers) to simplify their users' choice among the following RECOMMENDED rate limits:
- `20` messages per epoch as low-tier;
- `200` messages per epoch as mid-tier;
- `600` messages per epoch as high-tier.
```

I wouldn't expect an application to display all 3 tiers to all users. Really depends on the context.

Also, the recommendation of rate limit is done. It does imply that an application developer can propose rate limits outside of this 3 and just need to consider it carefully.

Author: I'm not sure I understand your suggestion. Do you suggest that an app SHOULD suggest one or multiple tiers to users, which may or may not intersect with our three RECOMMENDED tiers? Do you also think that a user SHOULD also, as an alternative to suggested tiers, be able to pick an arbitrary rate limit, perhaps under "advanced settings"?

Reviewer 2: My suggestion is as per the `suggested change` above.

1. I don't think we should recommend app developers to show all 3 tiers to users. It really depends on the use case, and more choice you offer to a user, more friction you create. On the contrary, I would recommend app developer to choose one rate to display to the user, depending on the application. The application developer should think abotu it and select a rate among the recommended one.
2. I don't think user should be able to pick an arbitrary rate limit, because again, more choice more friction.

The RECOMMENDED pricing parameters are:

| Parameter          | Value  |
| ------------------ | ------ |
| Accepted tokens    | `DAI`  |
| Reference currency | `USD`  |
| Pricing function   | linear |

> 

Reviewer 2: In this _Implementation Suggestions_ section, it may be good to separate suggestion to application developers (1st and 3rd) and suggestion smart contract developers/deployers.

Author: I thought that both the pricing function and the accepted currency are choices that smart contract deployers make, am i wrong? In particular, the pricing function (the way I see it) is to be encoded either in the main contract, or (for better upgradability) in another contract that is called from the main contract. Same for `DAI` as the pricing currency: is this really up for the app developer to decide? If I, as an app developer, want my app to accept `ETH`, for example, this won't change the fact that the deployed RLN contract accepts `DAI`. I'd need to involve an oracle and convert, sure, but isn't this out of scope for this spec?

Reviewer 2: My point exactly. The "Implementation suggestion" contains suggestion for application developers that use a smart contract already deployed:
1. The tiers to present to users
2. Saving expiration date and notifying.

And it also contain a suggestion for developers that deploy a smart contract: the token to accept.

This is confusing because if you used a SC already deployed, then you have no choice on the token.

Author: Gotcha. I'll move the recommendations to smart contract developers / deployers to an earlier parameter table, and the "Implementation suggestions" section would then only contain advice for app developers.

User-facing applications SHOULD save membership expiration dates in a local keystore during registration,
and notify the user when their membership is about to expire.

## Q&A

### Why can't I withdraw a deposit from an _Active_ membership?

> The rationale for this limitation is to prevent an undesirable usage pattern where users make deposits and withdrawals in short succession.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rationale for this limitation is to prevent an undesirable usage pattern where users make deposits and withdrawals in short succession.
Such pattern may lead to network instability and should be carefully studied if seen as desirable.
```

### Why can't I extend an _Active_ membership?

Memberships can only be extended during _GracePeriod_.
We do not allow extending an _Active_ membership.
The rationale is that if the contract _Owner_ changes some contract parameters (e.g., for security purposes),
users with extended memberships will not be affected by the changes for a long time.

### What if I don't extend my membership within its _GracePeriod_?

The user who does not extend their _GracePeriod_ membership, 

> assume the risk of the membership being overwritten at any moment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
assume the risk of the membership being overwritten as soon as it _expires_.
```

Author: If a membership is past its grace period, it is by definition in the _Expired_ state. For me it would sound confusing if an (already) _Expired_ membership can _expire_ (this time for real).

The core reason of this confusion is that we have two ways to look at a membership:
- what is its state from the protocol perspective;
- what is its state as reflected in contract storage.

The state diagram follows the former definition.

After the grace period expires, the membership becomes "logically" _Expired_, but it's not immediately reflected in the contract, hence (quite paradoxically) an _Expired_ membership allows sending messages until it becomes _Erased_ from the tree (or _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_).

I'd suggest re-formulating to:

> assume the risk of their _Expired_ membership being overwritten at any moment.

or simply

> 
> assume the risk of their _Expired_ membership being overwritten.

We expect that most users would not want to take that risk 

> and would either extend their memberships or withdraw their deposits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and would either extend their memberships or withdraw their deposit.
```

Author: I'll rephrase the whole thing in singular: "...a user... their membership... their deposit".

or when its deposit is withdrawn.
After a membership is erased, it can no longer be used for sending messages.

### Will my deposit be slashed if I exceed the rate limit?

This specification does not involve slashing.
The aim of the deposit initially is to protect the network from denial-of-service attacks with bandwidth capping.

### Do I need an extra deposit to extend a membership?

Membership extension requires no additional deposit.
The opportunity cost of locked-up capital plus gas fees for extension transactions make extensions non-free, which is sufficient for the initial mainnet deployment.

### Why this particular epoch length?

Epoch length is a global parameter set in the smart contract.
Rate limits are defined in terms of the maximum allowed messages per epoch.
There is a trade-off between short and long epochs.
We chose an epoch length of `10` minutes as a reasonable middle-ground.

On the one hand, longer epochs allow for better accommodating short-term usage peaks.
On the other hand, long epochs increases memory requirements for Relay nodes.

Each message contains a nullifier that proves its validity in terms of RLN.

> Each Relay node must keeps in memory a nullifier log for the current epoch.

Reviewer: typo
```suggestion
Each Relay node must keep in memory a nullifier log for the current epoch.
```

### Why is there a minimal rate limit?

The minimal rate limit prevents an attack where someone registers a large number of memberships with a tiny rate limit each, causing the RLN tree to contain too many elements.

### Are there bulk discounts for high-rate memberships?

For the initial mainnet deployment, there are no bulk discounts.
Membership price is linearly proportional to its rate limit.
We choose this pricing scheme for simplicity.
Finding a pricing scheme with the right trade-off remains subject for future work, as
high-rate memberships are arguably more efficient but can incentivize centralization.

### Why only accept DAI?

When choosing a token to accept, we considered the following criteria:
- a stablecoin, as USD-denominated pricing is familiar for users and requires no oracle;
- popular, high liquidity;
- preferably decentralized;
- with a reasonably good anti-censorship track record.

Based on these criteria, we chose DAI for the initial mainnet deployment.
Other tokens may be added in the future.

## Security / Privacy Considerations

> Issuing membership-specific transactions (e.g., membership extension and deposit withdrawal) publicly links it to an Ethereum address.

Reviewer 2: I Wonder if this should be in RLN Relay and if we should just point to RLN Relay's security section from here.  Just a thought.

Author: IMO, it can be either way.

The RLN Relay spec describes purely the P2P protocol. This spec describes the smart contract. Privacy issues (at least those that came to my mind, outlined here) originate at the intersection of both layers. Ideally, we should think of security and privacy holistically, taking all protocol components into consideration.

| _ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal_ | No                       |
| _Erased_                 | No                       |

Memberships MUST NOT be transferable.
A user MAY use one Ethereum address to manage multiple memberships.
A user MAY use one Waku node to manage multiple memberships. [^1]

[^1]: No Waku implementation supports managing multiple memberships from one node (as of August 2024).

## Contract functionalities

Availability of membership-specific functionalities MUST be as follows:

|                       | Active | GracePeriod | Expired | ErasedAwaitsWithdrawal | Erased |
| --------------------- | ------ | ----------- | ------- | ---------------------- | ------ |
| Send a message        | Yes    | Yes         | Yes     | No                     | No     |
| Extend the membership | No     | Yes         | No      | No                     | No     |
| Withdraw the deposit  | No     | Yes         | Yes     | Yes                    | No     |

Sending a message is included here for completeness,
although it is part of the RLN Relay protocol and not the RLN contract.

### Register a membership

Membership registration is subject to the following conditions:

> - if there are _Expired_ memberships in the RLN tree, the new membership MUST overwrite an _Expired_ membership;

Reviewer 7: I am not sure this can be enforced. I think the smart contract is not self-aware of the existence / number of expired memberships.
